thomasthiery: Hey! Hey!
Akash | ECH: Okay.
thomasthiery: How are you?
Akash | ECH: I'm fine. What about you?
thomasthiery: All good, all good, thanks.
Akash | ECH: Let's do some sound check.
Akash | ECH: Could you please pick something.
thomasthiery: Yeah.
thomasthiery: Hello. Hello.
Akash | ECH: Yeah, it's working.
thomasthiery: Okay. Nice.
Akash | ECH: I'm helping with the stream today. So let me know whenever you are ready, so I can switch this time.
thomasthiery: Okay. Sounds good.
Akash | ECH: Yeah.
thomasthiery: Hi, everyone. It's wait one or 2 min. And then we can start.
thomasthiery: Okay, maybe we can just go ahead. I think it's gonna be a short one, anyways.
thomasthiery: I don't have that many updates on the research side of things. I would say,
thomasthiery: yeah, maybe I can just give an impression of where I think fossil is in terms of
thomasthiery: positioning relative to Glamsterdam and the inclusion there.
thomasthiery: yeah, so I I feel like there has been quite a lot of conversation around slot restructuring or slot shortening.
thomasthiery: And the Tfdr is that fossil is like in basically compatible with both.
thomasthiery: I think in terms of
thomasthiery: yeah, practicality would be very hard to combine for so with something like shorter slot times, if
thomasthiery: my understanding is correct, because shorter start times is quite a big undertaking
thomasthiery: and might require to also like reach out to a lot of different actors throughout the space, so it wouldn't like necessarily like fit, too. Well, in terms of
thomasthiery: yeah, complexity and time needed to implement both.
thomasthiery: I think there is a different. That's a bit of a different argument for
thomasthiery: for the situation in which 1st all is combined with the slot restructuring eaps like, you know, it could be Pbs. It could be delayed. Execution could be.
thomasthiery: Yeah, probably one of the 2. I think there, there might be a bit more space for fossil to also
thomasthiery: sort of like fitting in the in the same form. But
thomasthiery: let's let's see how it it goes.
thomasthiery: The official sort of deadline for proposing headliners for Glamsterdam is now over, and now, I think, like the period of like discussions around.
thomasthiery: You know what should go into glimpse to them as a headliner, and maybe like, not as a headliner, is supposed to really kick start now.
thomasthiery: so yeah, just small update on this.
thomasthiery: I do encourage you to like
thomasthiery: well, we're not that many in the call, but like, if you do, have, you know
thomasthiery: thoughts or like opinions on
thomasthiery: whether fossil fits with like start restructuring or start shortening eips. If you think
thomasthiery: there is like some urgency around fossil being included. In Glamsterdam rather than later on. Please just like, speak up and and and maybe like.
thomasthiery: talk about it. Yeah.
thomasthiery: yeah. As I said earlier, I think there is not much controversy around fossil being important. But there is a lot of different opinions on whether fossil should be included like
thomasthiery: in Glamsterdam. I think that's like the most contentious world.
thomasthiery: So, yeah, that was just a small update. Does anyone have questions on? The
thomasthiery: more I I guess, like, high level for conclusion topic.
thomasthiery: okay, if not, let's get into yeah, implementation updates, maybe. Do you want to
thomasthiery: share what you just added in the chat.
Mehdi Aouadi: Yeah, sure. Yeah. I was referring to the we have 2 spec. Prs raised by Jihoon, and there is a discussion on there.
Mehdi Aouadi: I guess we can discuss that. So basically, the consensus spec one is about.
Mehdi Aouadi: how should we handle the inclusion list? Because initially, we put them in the store.
Mehdi Aouadi: and then we decided to do some changes. And it looks like we didn't reach consensus there.
Mehdi Aouadi: Oh, yeah, I know Mikhail has
Mehdi Aouadi: a different different view on that. So maybe we can discuss that.
thomasthiery: Yeah, for sure. So what are the 2 main options?
Mehdi Aouadi: So basically, initially, we, we put the inclusion list in the store, and we spec that. But now we have a new Pr to to remove that from the store, and
Mehdi Aouadi: as far if I'm not correct, the last change was to introduce an inclusion list store.
Mehdi Aouadi: and I don't know if everybody agrees on that. So yeah, I, to be honest, I don't have a strong opinion. I
Mehdi Aouadi: in Teku. I've implemented it the the way it was initially, which means I put the inclusion list in the store. I know other clients implemented it differently.
Mehdi Aouadi: but I think we we need to to make a decision on that point.
thomasthiery: Okay, yeah, that sounds good. Does anyone have strong opinions then on.
thomasthiery: So I guess it's like putting putting it in like a general sort of like generic store
thomasthiery: versus creating a new store that is specific for inclusion list. Isn't. Is that right?
Mehdi Aouadi: Yeah, we can summarize it that way.
thomasthiery: Okay.
thomasthiery: yeah. If you have thoughts me, Kyle.
Mikhail Kalinin: Yeah, I I'm sorry if there is a noise in my background. I was just going to speak about the spec.
Mikhail Kalinin: And yeah, if it's probably makes sense to do after implementation updates.
Justin Traglia: What do you mean? Account.
Mikhail Kalinin: I mean, are we doing implementation updates? Now.
thomasthiery: Let's dive in that's like that's part of the implementation.
Mikhail Kalinin: Okay.
Mehdi Aouadi: Yeah, there aren't really implementation detail. We, we're basically since few weeks. Now, we are working on the improving the spec. And so yeah, I think we can dive in directly.
Mikhail Kalinin: Okay. So I don't have a
Mikhail Kalinin: a strong opinion about whether it should be inclusion list or a separate thing to the focture store or not.
Mikhail Kalinin: What I was going to speak about is the the State transition, and
Mikhail Kalinin: actually specifying how Cl and El are communicated in the State transition function.
Mikhail Kalinin: I think that historically, and it makes a lot of sense to me. We've been trying to abstract away from the particular cl communication mechanism.
Mikhail Kalinin: and we have a separate spec for it, which is the engine api specification?
Mikhail Kalinin: So I think it is. From that standpoint it doesn't make sense to to actually put the way the Acl and Dl communicates it to a state transition.
Mikhail Kalinin: which is basically what the current Pr suggests to do.
Mikhail Kalinin: So I think that. Yeah, my point is basically that including list satisfiability doesn't have anything to relate it directly to the State transition itself.
Mikhail Kalinin: So the result of the State transition will not be affected by whether El is satisfied or not.
Mikhail Kalinin: And I think it's yeah. It should be a separate separated from the State transition.
Mikhail Kalinin: and we can do it in like
Mikhail Kalinin: when if we if we want, if we don't want to introduce a separate call to the execution engine to the spec. We can just abstract this check away by introducing an abstract function
Mikhail Kalinin: similar to retrieve blobs, retrieve data blobs as we have today we can just introduce something like is inclusion least satisfied.
Mikhail Kalinin: and pass a payrolled something like that. And the poke choice I mean.
Mikhail Kalinin: and poke choice in their own block handler.
Mikhail Kalinin: So this is kind of like my line of thoughts.
Justin Traglia: I guess the problem with that, though, is that it kind of leaves the spec a bit ambiguous? No, or would this be defined elsewhere.
Justin Traglia: like very clearly.
Mikhail Kalinin: It. It leaves this back abstract. Yes, you're correct. No, it's not going to be defined anywhere else.
Justin Traglia: Yeah, that's tough.
Mikhail Kalinin: Why?
Justin Traglia: I mean, it's not exactly simple. Is it like it?
Justin Traglia: It would be beneficial to spec this out. So that's not like an unknown, or what's it?
Mikhail Kalinin: You don't have to. What? What exactly do you want to spec out.
Justin Traglia: The interaction between the yield and the cl essentially.
Mikhail Kalinin: But.
Justin Traglia: Like the inclusion was satisfy or like
Justin Traglia: I don't know. I guess.
Mikhail Kalinin: Consensus spec is about the specification of the consensus layer protocol. It's not about the Clel communication.
Mikhail Kalinin: We have a separate spec for that, because we have a particular Cl communication mechanism, which is the engine Api that we use today.
Mikhail Kalinin: So
Mikhail Kalinin: I don't think it makes sense to put these communication into this pack and enshrine the particular way of communicating this to this pack.
Justin Traglia: What exactly are you proposing? We remove from the Pr like a.
Mikhail Kalinin: Yeah, I idea. Ideally, we should keep state transition untouched
Mikhail Kalinin: because it's not changed. It's it's not affected by the inclusion list check.
Mikhail Kalinin: If there is a strong push for enshrined in the elcl communication to Center State Transition. Then, I think we should remove this function and pass the
Mikhail Kalinin: or maybe not, I mean like not, not not remove, but replace clear of it.
Justin Traglia: Yeah, to be clear. Which function are you talking about? Are you talking about? Get inclusion list transactions?
Mikhail Kalinin: No, I'm talking about State transition itself.
Mikhail Kalinin: It. It's it's almost. It's almost a function now. Almost. Because, yeah, anyway. So it's a function now. And yeah, we should pass ya inclusion lists into it. Explicitly.
Justin Traglia: Specifically which function. Sorry. I guess I'm just confused at this point.
Mikhail Kalinin: So we have.
Justin Traglia: Unblock? Yeah, or.
Mikhail Kalinin: No, we have a state transition in the Pr.
Mikhail Kalinin: It has access to inclusion list store. It reads inclusion list from that store right?
Mikhail Kalinin: And then do does, and then passes them to El.
Mikhail Kalinin: The then then the state transition does not do anything about the result of el satisfiability check right.
Justin Traglia: I do not know.
Jihoon: You mean in the spec or in the actual implementation.
Mikhail Kalinin: Admin in this back.
Jihoon: In the spec it checks. If it return any error.
Mikhail Kalinin: But then this check is not surface to any other part of the spec right.
Jihoon: What do you mean?
Mikhail Kalinin: I mean that the result this step is used. Maybe I'm confused, you know.
Jihoon: So if it's return any error, then it.
Mikhail Kalinin: Yeah.
Jihoon: The Cl. Tries to reorget, and that happens in unblock functions.
Mikhail Kalinin: Right. But the spec does not say anything about how this information is passed from the State transition to the on block right?
Mikhail Kalinin: Or it does.
Jihoon: It does it
Jihoon: it? It wraps the state transition in the try catch, and if it's it tries to catch, if it returns
Jihoon: invalid inclusion, list, error.
Mikhail Kalinin: Oh, I see!
Jihoon: So I think this is a question about what is the right level of abstraction
Jihoon: so like for other people who are not familiar with this discussion. Let me add some.
Jihoon: yeah, thank you, Maddie. Let me add some share some context.
Jihoon: So
Jihoon: so what? I wanna ask people here, and maybe other devs, especially Cl. Devs, is about like what would be the best way to write the AI validation in the Cl. Spec.
Jihoon: The actual client implementation is the Cl. Passes the Ils when calling the new payload engine Api.
Jihoon: and that the el validates. If the given payload satisfies the ir constraints after transaction, execution and before withdrawal processing. So this is not a post state. This is some kind of a state in between.
Jihoon: like an intermediary state during the State transition. This is because of some some possible edge case.
Jihoon: So, anyway, and if it fails to satisfy il constraints, the El returns an error, and then Cl goes for its parent.
Jihoon: So in the spec. Currently it is.
Jihoon: this part corresponds to process execution, payload in state transition function. And currently, this is how the Pr is written at the moment. But the feedback is
Jihoon: from the sales perspective, as Mika said, the El State is out of concern. So instead of modifying process execution, payload function to pass ielt in the new payload call if I understood correctly, and then we just use like an abstract call, for example, is inclusively satisfied
Jihoon: in on block function, and if the result is false, then Cl. Tries to reorg it.
Jihoon: And my question is, what if, like this deviates from the actual implementation more than we want. So of course, we want good abstraction. But, like, I think the question is, how much do we tolerate the deviation from the actual implementation. And this is also related to whether we want to use work, choice store, or inclusively store. Because.
Jihoon: the reason why I
Jihoon: didn't try to include put the inclusion list in store is one. It is not a general purpose storage and second in my mind in the spec we want to use
Jihoon: process execution payload function to pass iels.
Jihoon: And this is happening on the beacon chain layer, not forkli store layer. So if you put iels in the forktory store, then the beacon chain should have an access to forktory store, and this changes like whole lot of function signatures. And this is too invasive.
Jihoon: And looking at other example, like Blob, also affects on fork choice algorithm. But we don't put it in fork choice store. We use abstract function call to retrieve blob data. So that's that's why I removed it from fork choice store. But there was another comment, that it's looks like a little bit of under
Jihoon: specification. So that's why I included in colossually store. And what it does is just basically specifying how that kind of a in colossually store
Jihoon: behaves when it received inclusion list, and it is also used in the process execution payload
Jihoon: function when it tries to fetch the incorrectly and pass it to the El.
Jihoon: So to summarize like, I think we have, like 3 options. One is going with the current implementation
Jihoon: the second is just like what mi mika suggested. We just remove all the changes in the State transition and use the
Jihoon: Is inclusively satisfied. Abstract engine Api call in unblock, and the 3rd option is, we just pass iels in the new payload call, as is today.
Jihoon: but instead of checking it like, if state transition returns an error.
Jihoon: or we just use the abstract function which is is inclusively satisfied to fetch the result from the El.
Jihoon: So, yeah, this is how I view it. But maybe we
Jihoon: might not able to reach to consensus, because well, we don't have enough dev, I guess.
Jihoon: But yeah.
thomasthiery: Okay, does anyone have an opinion about this? What you guys, I mean, Justin, maybe
Justin Traglia: And I was just thinking that the latter 2 options we wouldn't be wouldn't be able to do as much testing correct for inclusion lists
Justin Traglia: like, if it's an abstract function.
Jihoon: I think we need to monkey patch it. And it would be possible. But yeah, so currently, what I,
Jihoon: what I've done in my local change is we didn't have inclusively stored. So we just retrieve in colossal list transactions.
Jihoon: But I think I we can monkey patch inclusionally store as well. So yeah, so it's it's, I think it's just a matter of decision. So.
Justin Traglia: I'm not sure how that we I'm not sure how we would do that, for, like the reference tests, though.
Justin Traglia: like we would have to ask clients to monkey Patch to right if I'm understanding that correctly.
Jihoon: Do you remember how we monkey patch test blobs because they also use a retrieve blob and proof as a monkey patch function.
Justin Traglia: Yeah, I don't know. I don't. I just don't think we have tests for that, or I don't remember.
Jihoon: Right.
Justin Traglia: Or we just I don't know. I don't remember. Sorry.
Jihoon: No worries. I also don't remember. Maybe we can just add the testing format to yield inclusion list so that client can consume that testing vectors.
Justin Traglia: Yeah, maybe.
Jihoon: Yep.
Justin Traglia: I'll I'll just say that I don't really have a strong opinion on any of this
Justin Traglia: whatever simple and well spec or like. Clearly spec.
thomasthiery: Yeah, well, I'm not a dev. But I I do think like in some ways
thomasthiery: I do introduce a new primitive on the protocol like
thomasthiery: it. It doesn't really exist now that, like some actors, constrain others, especially like
thomasthiery: that, the Cl. Sort of like
thomasthiery: for choice is affected by a very ill.
thomasthiery: He had heavy sort of feature of having transactions included in a block or not.
thomasthiery: so it makes sense that it. It will break some of the super clean abstraction we are trying to keep in some ways.
thomasthiery: I don't think there is like any
thomasthiery: fundamental way around that, just because it's it's very core to the proposal. Right? Like this sort of like interaction between the Cl and Dl is.
thomasthiery: is really yeah. Call to to what fossil is, and what inclusion lists are.
thomasthiery: So now, if the I don't know if, like
thomasthiery: there is a clean, simple way to do that. Great.
thomasthiery: If there is one way that allows for more testing than others, or maybe tend to lean that way just because we will need quite a lot of of testing for for fossil, I think.
thomasthiery: yeah, but it I mean it. It does feel like a an implementation sort of like
thomasthiery: choice that is not like extremely. There is going to be like very hard to motivate strongly.
thomasthiery: So
thomasthiery: do you have other like sort of I mean, you said you didn't have strong opinions, but like
thomasthiery: did your opinion sort of evolve? Or do you still think the same, Miguel.
Mikhail Kalinin: On the testing side.
Mikhail Kalinin: I think that
Mikhail Kalinin: we can only expect so we're we're speaking about consensus layer testing rep tests.
Mikhail Kalinin: So the there are 2 possible
Mikhail Kalinin: there are 2 possible outcomes of the El satisfaction. Check it, either satisfied or not.
Mikhail Kalinin: I think we cannot go beyond this level of abstraction, anyway.
Mikhail Kalinin: and we'll just have to yield this in the and respect us.
Mikhail Kalinin: and with the high level of abstraction
Mikhail Kalinin: from the Clel communication. It's it's possible.
Jihoon: I don't have any strong opinion on using the abstract function is inclusionally satisfied.
Jihoon: But I have an opinion
Jihoon: that if we were to use new payload call to pass the Ils.
Jihoon: then the Cs back is better to specify it in that way.
Jihoon: So I'm okay. If we don't check. If the State transition function call returns an error or not, if give us
Jihoon: better abstraction.
Jihoon: But the engine Api call, I mean the new payload call.
Jihoon: It's better to follow the actual implementation, but I think
Jihoon: it would be the Cl. Devs who
Jihoon: can make a better decision.
Mikhail Kalinin: Yeah. But if we do this, introduce this dependence into this pack, then the State transition function should have
Mikhail Kalinin: should get the inclusion list from from somewhere, right.
Jihoon: Yes, and isn't it the same if we were to just use is inclusionally satisfied function. Only
Jihoon: you mean, like you, yeah, you want to put inclusion list in the broke choice, and then just pass it.
Mikhail Kalinin: Yeah, I'm I'm just saying that if we want
Mikhail Kalinin: So my opinion is that if we want for some reason to make inclusion list a part of notifying your payload call.
Mikhail Kalinin: then it should rather be explicitly passed to the State transition.
Mikhail Kalinin: and the result of these check should be explicitly returned by the State transition function.
Mikhail Kalinin: not by an error like it is done today because it's too pythonic, but by some
Mikhail Kalinin: protocol logic rather than some python logic.
Mikhail Kalinin: So it's like state transition becomes a new function, which is actually 2 state transition and check inclusion dissatisfiability.
Mikhail Kalinin: It accepts inclusion lists explicitly as a parameter, and it also returns a
Mikhail Kalinin: not only the modified state as it is as it does today, but also returns the result of the English, and least check.
Mikhail Kalinin: then this check can be used as is now in the Pr. By the unblock.
Mikhail Kalinin: But I disagree with this.
Mikhail Kalinin: Let's let's find it this way. But if there is a strong push
Mikhail Kalinin: for you know, pass and el
Mikhail Kalinin: to notify new payload in the consensus layers fact, and we can do it this way.
thomasthiery: Okay. Okay. So you, if I understand correctly.
thomasthiery: one of the pushback is also on how?
thomasthiery: Oh, the inclusion? Yeah, I mean, I I think I agree with the general idea of
thomasthiery: not trying to sort of
thomasthiery: make it implicit. That is, it is like modifying the folk choice in in some way like, because it
thomasthiery: effectively effectively is and I don't. I don't really have a problem with like having, you know.
thomasthiery: the Il satisfiability as a an explicit input
thomasthiery: into the folk choice function.
thomasthiery: and also that, like the sort of like vote or not, vote is conditioned by whether the
thomasthiery: Il condition is satisfied.
thomasthiery: Yeah, I wouldn't mind having that. Instead of just that arrow popping up.
thomasthiery: I'm I'm wondering whether all like other people have opinions on this. But like at at least intuitively, I I see why it's maybe a bit nicer to have it explicitly defined.
Jihoon: I mean, if we explicitly try to change 10 transition function that we have to change all the function signatures from State transition down to process
Jihoon: execution payload. And I think that's invasive changes. And looking at how clients are implemented, they don't. They use their own way to cache in collision list and fetch it somehow. They don't change state transition functions.
thomasthiery: Okay? So you think it's, it's base. Basically, it's better to contain
thomasthiery: the validity of the payload on the El side. And so
thomasthiery: all the Cl. Has to know is whether the the payload is.
thomasthiery: It's sort of like returns a narrow or not.
Jihoon: Rather than changing all the you know state transition related functions, because that is how it is implemented. And for me I may be biased because I
Jihoon: I know how, for the Cl and el are implemented. So for me, that's much easier to read and comprehend.
Jihoon: But I also understand that there is another separate spec, for you know the specific communication. So we want to use that abstraction.
Jihoon: So yeah, but like
Jihoon: I, my, I'm of the opinion that making it explicit is, is a bit too invasive.
thomasthiery: Yeah, okay, I see. Right?
thomasthiery: And then.
thomasthiery: yeah, I mean, if it do, if it introduces a lot of complexity on the Cl side of things, because you actually do need to change a lot of things for
thomasthiery: if you want to explicitly change the fog choice, then
thomasthiery: yeah, maybe I go back on what I was saying before, I I feel like.
thomasthiery: yeah, maybe we need to balance like
thomasthiery: simplicity of implementing the the actual thing we want to implement and and
thomasthiery: the conceptual abstraction of what it actually does. Because I agree like that. Yeah, conceptually like, it does actually change the folk choice like we can't.
thomasthiery: We can't really go around that. But
thomasthiery: if it makes it much easier to constrain changes
thomasthiery: to the El in terms of like payload, and whether it's like it's valid, basically or not.
thomasthiery: rather than having to to change like the whole State transaction function. And and whether or like 2 vote or not for a block. I feel like I would be leaning that way.
thomasthiery: But yeah, it's
thomasthiery: It's hard for me to comment too much on it also because I I feel like I've been talking a lot, but I don't.
thomasthiery: Usually I'm not to call them so.
Jihoon: Maybe I can, you know. Try to summarize all the discussions we had here, and then
Jihoon: I can't.
Jihoon: I can leave that as a comment in the Pr so that everyone can take a look into it.
Jihoon: And I don't think we have to make a decision today. So we can invite more core devs to take a look into it and then provide some feedback.
Jihoon: Yeah. So like, I'm also okay with, like avoiding the
Jihoon: if the State transition returns on error or not because it I feel like that somehow.
Jihoon: mixing the clnel communication
Jihoon: too much. But like, yeah, I think we are just circling back to the same question, like, What is what kind of what is the right level of abstraction we want?
Jihoon: But I guess we are liking up Cl. Devs here. But yes, Mikhail.
Mikhail Kalinin: Yeah, I just wanted to add, maybe this is kind of like, summarize my thoughts on it.
Mikhail Kalinin: for today I agree that we should not make any decision may not make any decision. Today
Mikhail Kalinin: we have time.
Mikhail Kalinin: I just wanted to emphasize that
Mikhail Kalinin: if we think that this check should be explicit.
Mikhail Kalinin: The inclusion list is explicitly passed as a parameter. The result is explicitly returned by the State transition function.
Mikhail Kalinin: and we are thinking that this is going to be an invasive change, then we should think that
Mikhail Kalinin: is the implicit way of doing it also invasive.
Mikhail Kalinin: Why, why can't we just change the semantics of the State transition. It's not only the interface, the interface is easy to to change.
Mikhail Kalinin: but it's only the. It's also the semantics of the function. So we add one more semantics to to the State transition
Mikhail Kalinin: in this pack, which is from the spec standpoint.
Mikhail Kalinin: It's not. It's not good, and should be justified very well to my opinion.
Mikhail Kalinin: so that that's just it.
thomasthiery: Yeah, can you like? Just so, I'm I'm sure I'm I understand what you're saying is like.
thomasthiery: yeah, if we imagine we contain like
thomasthiery: the the issue of having to change the whole 4 choice function by just
thomasthiery: like conceptually, on like returning an error of like saying, the payload is is valid or is invalid. And so it's like, basically, you either
thomasthiery: explicitly add a con like a a parameter, and like another sort of input to the for choice function, or you add an invalidity condition to the payload on the Es side.
thomasthiery: And you're saying both are like in invasive
thomasthiery: Is that is that what you're saying is like, basically you you I mean, you still have differences in terms of how how hard it's gonna be to implement on the both on the Cl. And es. I know.
Mikhail Kalinin: No, I'm just. Yeah. I'm saying that. If we can't for some reason make this check explicit
Mikhail Kalinin: in the State transition, not in the folk choice in the State transition.
thomasthiery: Yeah.
Mikhail Kalinin: And and the reason is that it is invasive. So we we should.
Mikhail Kalinin: I don't see the difference between implicitly doing it and explicitly doing the same thing.
Mikhail Kalinin: So, but explicit is explicitly doing it. Just, you know, highlights us that these changes in ways I'm just trying to try to explain why, I think it's a you know.
Mikhail Kalinin: it's it's a wrong way to modify state transition. In this case. We know that these changes like
Mikhail Kalinin: you know.
Mikhail Kalinin: Yeah, because it's too invasive for me. It's it's too invasive. It's very invasive for the State transition to have some specifics about how Cl and Dl communicate.
Jihoon: Yeah, I get what you mean. But I have a 1 question for you. So whether we change function signatures or not, if we decide to use new payload engine. Api call to pass the Ils.
Jihoon: Do you still think that we should not specify in the spec.
Mikhail Kalinin: Oh, I I think with that we should make it explicit, like a path to aisle, to state transition, and return the
Mikhail Kalinin: not the error, not by doing doing it, by handling the error, by catching the error because it it becomes a spec, right? So it becomes a
Mikhail Kalinin: a logic, a spec logic. So it should be written in a
Mikhail Kalinin: not not in the python way, you know, but it should rather be written in this pack logic way, so like a more I don't know. I I probably don't know right words to how to express this.
thomasthiery: Okay.
thomasthiery: yeah. Well, I I feel like there are 2 things. But correct me if I'm wrong, one is you are saying that it is a complex
thomasthiery: change, that is, and whether it's explicit and implicit, like it actually does change the folk choice.
thomasthiery: I mean, I think that's true. But like. I think, most of people that have been working on for solar like
thomasthiery: Ready, probably assuming that it's worth adding this
thomasthiery: complexity and change to the protocol because it it gives a lot. So I think there is a trade off there that I mean, yeah. You know, every like most protocol upgrades will bring some added complexity. And then, if the trade off is like in the favor of but that added complexity will actually give us something we really care about. Then it's it's probably worth doing.
thomasthiery: And then the the second very different
thomasthiery: thing you're saying is like you don't like the pythonic way of expressing of like, just like a.
thomasthiery: you know, having like a an error expressed to oh.
thomasthiery: to like surface. The fact that the payload didn't satisfy the inclusion list. And that's yeah. I mean, that's very. That's 2 very, very different questions to me. I think the second one
thomasthiery: is worth maybe trying to express it in in a different way. For the 1st one, if it's just more general comment about like it actually brings some complexity into the protocol.
thomasthiery: And you're not sure it always the benefits of having fossil. In the 1st place.
thomasthiery: Yeah, we we can definitely have that discussion. But it's it's a very different one.
Mikhail Kalinin: Yeah. And and the 3rd concern is that we are going to introduce something
Mikhail Kalinin: to the State transition function that does not have anything to deal with the the State transition itself.
Mikhail Kalinin: I mean, it does not affect the result of the State transition function.
Mikhail Kalinin: And that's the problem. So we are just adding an additional semantics to this function.
Mikhail Kalinin: There are, there are actually 2 functions in one.
Mikhail Kalinin: This is how this spec works today. This one, my other concern.
Mikhail Kalinin: Yeah. But I think, yeah, let's just stop here. And probably if anyone yeah, if
Mikhail Kalinin: if if this discussion will be relevant we can continue next time, or you know it's sometime after.
thomasthiery: Yeah, sounds good. Okay,
thomasthiery: And if we can also ask, like, the opinion of
thomasthiery: some other people, I guess. Yeah, if I mean Jiho. And you said you were okay to do that if we can summarize things and
thomasthiery: maybe post it in the Pr. But also like post it on the
thomasthiery: Il or like inclusion list discord chat. So people can have a look and sort of like comment on this, I think, might be useful to just have a bit more visibility on this.
thomasthiery: yeah. Does that sound good?
Jihoon: Yeah, I can. I'm just happy that just like use this time to
Jihoon: Bring our thoughts on the table, and
Jihoon: let's see, like, what kind of options are ahead of us.
Jihoon: And yeah, I can, of course, like, share the
Jihoon: oh, no, no, no. I really appreciate your feedback. And yeah, please, just yeah.
Jihoon: And yeah, thank you for your providing feedback. And
Jihoon: Let me share the summarize in the in the discord. Maybe. So that if my summarize is wrong or off, then please just leave a comment there, so we can have a better summarized. Be a summary before, you know, asking other core devs for or feedback.
Jihoon: So yeah.
thomasthiery: Yeah. Sounds great. Cool.
thomasthiery: Okay. So are there on other like items that people wanted to talk about other than than this.
Jihoon: Actually I have. It's a it's a short one So
Jihoon: in the beginning Mehdi shared 2 prs. One is a Cl spec, and the other is a
Jihoon: exigent Api spec,
Jihoon: So
Jihoon: in the execution. Api spec, I'd like to change, to use fork choice updated instead of update payload include
Jihoon: inclusion list. It's because inclusion list are part of payload building process, and it seems there is no strong objection to overloading
Jihoon: payload attributes. So I've been asking people about like
Jihoon: what would be better engine Api last week. And then this is the conclusion that I got so and so using forecast updated seems semantically better. The Cl can call for choice, updated, for example, at the beginning of the slot with without inclusion list, and then it can call it again with enclosure list after the proposals. Inclusion list cut off.
Jihoon: And right, I'm sorry. Keep just using our time. But lastly,
Jihoon: this is also because feedback. I think we should introduce Il broadcast deadline at 12 seconds into the slot to avoid split view by Il equivocation. So let's consider this scenario. A proposer proposes a block at 12 seconds into the into the slot, and the block doesn't satisfy some. Il.
Jihoon: then 50% of our testers vote for his parent.
Jihoon: But some Il committee equivocates that il, and let's say the rest of our testers recognize this equivocation and exclude that il during il validation. So they vote for that block.
Jihoon: So although this is this might be a rare edge case. Introducing il broadcast deadline at 12 seconds into the slot will avoid this tester, split view before and after their attestation. Because we do not reevaluate il validation, even if we have il equipation after a tester finish their attestation.
thomasthiery: Right?
thomasthiery: Okay? And you're saying we don't have an explicit date like sort of like deadline at 12 seconds. Now, right.
Jihoon: We don't have it, do we?
thomasthiery: No, I don't think we do. Yeah, you're you're right.
thomasthiery: Yeah, yeah, okay, yeah. So just adding.
thomasthiery: Yeah, that that actually sounds good.
thomasthiery: But maybe good to also write it down. So more people can give input. It does make sense to me, like.
thomasthiery: yeah, we should have a sort of like end timer.
thomasthiery: But yeah, if you have a chance to just write down like in it doesn't have to be like sort of like fleshed out just like the give you like, write down the idea, and so we can just
thomasthiery: add it to the spec. Then I think that would be quite useful.
Jihoon: Right that let me share that summaries of 2 thing. By tomorrow.
thomasthiery: Yeah, yeah, no, that sounds good.
thomasthiery: Great. Okay, no. Thanks for sharing. That's that's useful.
thomasthiery: okay, maybe a more general high level comment to finish is like, I think it's nice to
thomasthiery: like, really sort of hash down
thomasthiery: implementation details and sort of like, discuss exactly how the the spec should should look like. But
thomasthiery: I feel like it's gonna be done anyways when or if let's say fossil gets Cfid.
thomasthiery: One thing that I sort of graphed in in some chat. So it's it's a bit informal, I think. But is that there might be some like additional constraints on eips if they don't come with like specs spec tests. So I think it would be important to also sort of like.
thomasthiery: have some doesn't have to be exhaustive. It doesn't have to, you know, cover all the crazy, weird edge cases. But I think it would be nice to also sort of push on this soonish? Because.
thomasthiery: yeah, we are like, basically in the middle of like of discussions around whether or to
thomasthiery: to include Efs or not.
thomasthiery: So if that is a factor, I think
thomasthiery: it, it would be nice to have like spectest and sort of like be ahead of the curve.
thomasthiery: although I don't know.
Justin Traglia: We are just to be clear. We are publishing spec tests, reference tests for fossil eip, 7, 8 0, 5, correct.
thomasthiery: Well, wait what? Olive.
Justin Traglia: There are. I mean, it's mostly like the
Justin Traglia: the standard suite of tests to be clear that I don't believe there are any specific like inclusion list tests. Yet.
thomasthiery: Yeah. Okay, yeah. Okay, nice. Okay. Good. Good to know. Yeah. I I had in mind, like the sort of like, yeah, trying to test. Some
thomasthiery: even basics test around like inclusion this per se of, or what can happen? Or I don't know, you know, equivocation and stuff like this? Or
thomasthiery: do we have time to propagate?
thomasthiery: Different objects in time? Are the deadlines set correctly? All of these questions are like.
thomasthiery: I think there are like we we got also, like some really big margins. So I think we are all safe. But like, yeah, just saying, it would be nice to sort of have some tests run around that specifically, but.
Justin Traglia: Alright, I agree, and that'll be
Justin Traglia: quite a lot, I thought. That's fine.
thomasthiery: Yeah.
thomasthiery: okay, cool. And yeah, that being said, I think, like some other uips like, are not even close to being even like spect, or defined or specified. So we I we shouldn't like
thomasthiery: take these 2 crazily.
thomasthiery: I don't think it would be like a super hard requirement, but just like sort of like, nice to keep in mind. Yeah, Jeremy.
Jihoon: Right. So I just wanted to ask you about how much coverage test coverage we want, because we, our spec is changing so, and that affects on how the spec test should be written.
Jihoon: But I can write tests that are not affected by the changing spec. And would it be okay.
thomasthiery: Yeah, I think we should start by having this test in in any case. Like, maybe it's a good way to think about it. I think, like 2, maybe dimensions are important. The one is like, do we want to test like very obvious failure cases like we don't want to necessarily get into like the super weird edge cases now, and like, we want to test
thomasthiery: things that are less likely to change given like the spec considerations.
thomasthiery: Yeah, if we can have some tests that fit well with those 2 dimensions, I think that would be good enough. So yeah.
Jihoon: Okay? So I think the test we can have today would be something not related to the changing part which would be which is related related to Inclusion List Committee and that kind of stuff. And since we are currently discussing where to put inclusion list, and so on, so that can, that part cannot be
Jihoon: tested. Unfortunately.
thomasthiery: Yeah, okay.
Jihoon: Because.
thomasthiery: Yeah, yeah, we can. We can start with that. I think it's fine.
thomasthiery: I I just don't want yeah, I just don't want to like block things, because the spec might change like I feel like. In any case, the spec will probably change like once a lot of people look at it and like, try to implement it in in and like, try to actually work on it very seriously
thomasthiery: for like future folks.
thomasthiery: But yeah, let's let's definitely start with like this. That wouldn't be affected by this. And and we can just like check back in a couple of weeks or something.
Jihoon: Yeah, sounds great. So I will just unload the spec test that I already made, and I will just move on to the El Spec test. While we are discussing the Cl. Spec.
thomasthiery: Okay? Awesome.
thomasthiery: Yeah, that sounds great. Thanks.
thomasthiery: Cool. Anything else from anyone else.
thomasthiery: Okay, well, thanks a lot for coming. And see you all. Online.
thomasthiery: Bye-bye.
Justin Traglia: Bye, everyone.
Mehdi Aouadi: Mate.